TRAINING REQUIREMENTS FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY:   AN INTRODUCTION TO 
RESULTS-BASED LEARNING

Information technology (IT) security is "a new high-risk area that touches 
virtually every major aspect of government operations," according to a recent 
U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) report on federal government information 
technology systems.  GAO cited several factors that contributed to the risks, 
including insufficient awareness and understanding of information security risks 
on the part of managers, and a shortage of personnel with sufficient technical 
expertise needed to manage security controls.

Organizations are challenged to provide their staff members with the appropriate 
awareness, training, and education to enable them to carry out their 
responsibilities effectively and to protect the organization's information 
technology systems.  This bulletin introduces some of the principles for the 
training of staff members according to their roles within their organizations 
and for measuring the results of the training.  The material in this bulletin 
was excerpted from NIST Special Publication 800-16, Information Technology 
Security Training Requirements:  A Role- and Performance-Based Model.  The 
document was developed by the Federal Computer Security Program Managers Forum 
and the Federal Information Systems Security Educators' Association (FISSEA).  
The guideline is available in paper copy from the Government Printing Office and 
in electronic format from NIST's Web pages: 

http://csrc.nist.gov

Background

Staff members play a critical role in protecting the integrity, confidentiality, 
and availability of information of their organizations' information technology 
systems and networks.  The Computer Security Act of 1987 (Public Law 100-235) 
established requirements for "the mandatory periodic training in computer 
security awareness and accepted computer practices of all employees who are 
involved with the management, use, or operation of each Federal computer system 
within or under the supervision of that agency."   

To implement this provision of the Computer Security Act, the National Institute 
of Standards and Technology (NIST) worked with the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) to develop the first training guidelines, which were issued in 
November 1989 (NIST Special Publication 500-172, Computer Security Training 
Guidelines).  In January 1992, OPM revised the federal personnel regulations to 
mandate that agencies provide training.  In 5 CFR Part 930, Employees 
Responsible for the Management or Use of Federal Computer Systems, agencies are 
directed to provide mandatory training for current and new employees.  Training 
is also required whenever there is a significant change in the agency's IT 
security environment or procedures, or when an employee enters a new position 
that involves sensitive information.  Further, periodic refresher training 
should be provided, based on the sensitivity of the information the employee 
handles.  Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, "Management of 
Federal Information Resources," Appendix III, "Security of Federal Automated 
Information Resources," reinforces these agency responsibilities for providing 
mandatory training, including specialized training based on staff members' IT 
security responsibilities.  

Special Publication (SP) 500-172 provided a framework for determining the 
training needs of particular categories of employees (including contractors) 
involved with sensitive but unclassified computer systems, but it was oriented 
to the mainframe environment of its time.  SP 800-16 supersedes SP 500-172 and 
provides a new conceptual framework for IT security training that is appropriate 
to today's distributed computing environment.  It is expected that the framework 
will be extended in the future to accommodate changing technologies and their 
related risk management decisions.

Principles of the New Approach to Results-Based Learning

Results-based learning focuses on the job functions that individuals perform, 
and on their specific roles and responsibilities, rather than on their job 
titles.  This approach to learning recognizes that individuals have unique 
backgrounds and different levels of understanding.  Also individuals may have 
more than one organizational role, and will need security training that 
satisfies the specific responsibilities of each role.      

Everyone needs basic training in IT security concepts and procedures.  After the 
basic training, three levels of IT security training are recommended - 
beginning, intermediate, and advanced training.  Each level of training is 
linked to roles and responsibilities.  Because individuals may perform more than 
one role within the organization, they may need intermediate or advanced level 
IT security training in their primary job role, but only the beginning level in 
a secondary or tertiary role.  Thus training can be tailored to individual 
employee needs and career mobility, and to an organization's evolving or 
changing mission and its mix of job functions.

The results-based model for training provides an integrated framework to 
identify training needs throughout the workforce and to ensure that everyone 
receives appropriate training.  By relating job function to required IT security 
knowledge, managers can identify the training needed to fulfill their IT 
security responsibilities, to understand the consequences of denying or 
deferring training, and to plan and schedule training according to 
organizational priorities.  

The results-based model also helps course developers identify the learning 
outcomes expected for individuals in various roles with varying 
responsibilities.  This facilitates the development of IT security course 
material targeted to the needs of the federal workforce and encourages the 
development of basic training modules that can be readily customized or adapted 
to an organization's needs.  

Role-Based Model for Training

The model is based on the premise that learning is a continuum that starts with 
awareness, builds to training, and evolves into education.  While learning is a 
continuum in terms of levels of knowledge, the acquisition or delivery of that 
knowledge need not proceed sequentially.  Given resource constraints, 
organizations have a responsibility to evaluate the scope of their IT security 
training needs and the effectiveness of the training provided in order to 
allocate future training resources and to derive the greatest value or return on 
investment. 

The model is role-based.  It defines the IT security learning needed as a person 
assumes different roles within an organization and different responsibilities in 
relation to IT systems.  The model is used to identify the knowledge, skills, 
and abilities an individual needs to perform the IT security responsibilities 
specific to their role in the organization.  The type of learning that 
individuals need becomes more comprehensive as they perform more complex multi-
disciplinary activities. 

Awareness, Training, and Education

Awareness, training and education are all important processes for helping staff 
members carry out their roles and responsibilities for information technology 
security, but they are not the same.  

Awareness programs which have been established by many organizations are a 
prerequisite to IT security training.  Awareness presentations focus attention 
on security, and allow individuals to recognize IT security concerns.  In 
awareness activities, the learner is a recipient of information.  Awareness 
relies on reaching broad audiences with attractive packaging techniques.  
Examples of IT security awareness materials are promotional trinkets with 
motivational slogans, videotapes, and posters or flyers.  

Awareness presentations must be ongoing, creative, and motivational, with the 
objective of focusing the learner's attention so that the learning will be 
incorporated into conscious decision-making.  Learning achieved through a single 
awareness activity tends to be short-term, immediate, and specific. 

Detailed guidance on IT security awareness is outside the scope of the training 
guidelines.  The fundamental value of IT security awareness programs is that 
they set the stage for training by bringing about a change in attitudes which 
change the organizational culture.  The cultural change is the realization that 
IT security is critical because a security failure has potentially adverse 
consequences for everyone. 

Training addresses the needed security skills and competencies of practitioners 
of functional specialties other than IT security.  This includes managers, 
systems designers and developers, and acquisition and auditing staff members.  
Training is more formal and more active than awareness activities and is 
directed toward building knowledge and skills to facilitate job performance.  IT 
security training encompasses IT security basics and literacy, and is tied to 
the individuals' specific roles and responsibilities.  

The IT security basics and literacy involve the generic concepts, terms, and 
associated learning modules that are common among different groups of employees 
or organizations.  In the federal government, this approach eliminates 
redundancies and establishes a baseline of IT security knowledge for employees 
who may change jobs or organizations and use different IT systems.  

Education is another learning level beyond training and is usually limited to an 
organization's designated IT security specialists.  Providing formal education 
to this group is outside the purview of most federal agency training programs, 
with some notable exceptions among national security-related agencies.  
Education (as distinguished from training) and associated on-the-job experience 
are essential for IT security specialists to be able to fulfill their roles in 
an effective manner.

Education integrates all of the security skills and competencies of the various 
functional specialties into a common body of knowledge, adds a multi-
disciplinary study of concepts, issues, and principles (technological and 
social), and strives to produce IT security specialists and professionals 
capable of vision and responsiveness. 

Formal education has become a key element to IT security.  In the past, computer 
security specialists were practitioners who came from the ranks of computer 
specialists.  Security responsibilities were often assigned as collateral duties 
to their primary functional specialty.  Some federal agencies paid for 
occasional training courses for their designated Computer Security Officers or 
specialists, but few agency officials recognized a need to enroll these critical 
staff members in formal computer security educational programs.  Agencies seldom 
required evidence of qualification or certification as a condition of 
appointment. 

IT security functions have become increasingly technologically and managerially 
complex and organizations are seeking educated IT security professionals who can 
solve severe security and privacy problems and who can integrate security 
principles with changing technology and evolving security implications. 

Awareness is the point-of-entry for all employees into the progression of IT 
security knowledge levels.  Training starts with Security Basics and Literacy, 
and then builds a wide range of security-related skills needed by employees.  
Education is the capstone of the learning continuum, creating expertise 
necessary for IT security specialists and professionals. 

Learning Styles and Teaching Methods

Providing training to individuals does not necessarily ensure that learning has 
occurred.  Learning can best be demonstrated by subsequent on-the-job 
performance.  The guideline describes learning objectives that are performance-
based, rather than content-based, and that provide benchmarks for evaluating 
learning effectiveness.  This enables evaluation to become a component of 
organizational IT security training programs and provides an evaluation planning 
process.

Individuals learn in different ways, and each has a preferred or primary 
learning style.  The learning approach most effective for individuals is a 
function of their preferred learning style, education, and prior experience.  In 
learning information or concepts, some students will do better through reading; 
others prefer to listen to a lecture; still others need to participate in a 
discussion in order to understand the material.

Instructors should be aware of these learning style differences and should use a 
variety of teaching approaches and presentation formats such as multimedia, 
searchable databases, text, graphics, simulations, team teaching, decision 
trees, and interactive learning.  A variety of delivery approaches can be used 
including classroom instruction, computer-based instruction, manuals, self-paced 
instruction books, videotapes, interactive workshops with "hands-on" exercises, 
and one-on-one mentoring/coaching by senior staff.

Materials developers and trainers should consider the education and experience 
of their target audience and tailor their presentation approach and content 
accordingly.  An individual with an advanced degree will perceive and learn new 
material in a manner that is different from an individual without a degree but 
who has extensive on-the-job experience. 

Adult learners learn best when they perceive the relevance of the knowledge or 
skill to their current job or to their career advancement.  When the instructor 
is able to emphasize the applicability and practical purpose of the material to 
be mastered, the learning retention rates and the subsequent transference of the 
new knowledge or skill to the learners' jobs and organizational settings will be 
enhanced.  

Topics Covered and Future Activities 
 
Topics covered in the guidelines are:

IT Security Basics and Literacy, including generic IT security terms and 
concepts for all staff members as a baseline for further, role-based learning, 
and ways for students to relate and apply information learned to their jobs.  

Training Development Methodology for Role-Based Training -   Building on the 
Security Basics and Literacy training layer, the methodology presents specific 
performance-based training requirements and outcomes mapped to job functions.  
Six role categories are Manage, Acquire, Design and Develop, Implement and 
Operate, Review and Evaluate, and Use (with a seventh category, "Other" included 
to provide extensibility).  A matrix is provided to relate the categories to 
three training content categories:  Laws and Regulations, Security Program, and 
System Life Cycle Security.  The methodology identifies a set of twelve high-
level IT security body of knowledge topics and concepts appropriate to each cell 
in the matrix from which curriculum content can be constructed.  

Evaluating Training Effectiveness - Evaluation is essential to an organization's 
IT security training program.  Purposes of evaluation, progressive levels of 
training evaluation, and evaluation planning and implementation are discussed.    

Appendices provide details on the Information Technology Security Learning 
Continuum, a training matrix, a glossary, government IT security references, and 
job function training modules.

The developers of the training guidelines plan to extend and update them as the 
technology changes.  This will enable organizations to keep abreast of changes 
and their impact on the protection of information and systems.  Future ITL 
Bulletins will cover some of these issues in depth.
