MANAGEMENT OF RISKS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS:  PRACTICES OF SUCCESSFUL 
ORGANIZATIONS  

Recent break-ins to U.S. government and university computer systems demonstrate 
just how vulnerable even the most sophisticated organizations can be to 
technological assaults.  While the new attacks caused no apparent damage to 
information or to the systems, these incidents are unfortunate reminders that 
the potential exists for severe damage.  Systems are at risk from fraud, user 
errors, accidents and natural disasters, as well as from sabotage and other 
malicious acts.  

It is a fact of life that organizations are becoming increasingly dependent on 
interconnected information systems to conduct business and to provide 
information and services to their customers.  While the vulnerabilities of 
systems are getting increasing attention, many organizations have not adopted 
systematic, thorough practices for evaluating system vulnerabilities and for 
reducing risk.  Recently, the General Accounting Office (GAO) studied 
organizations that had successfully adopted superior security programs.  This 
bulletin describes some of the good practices that GAO identified and 
disseminated to help other organizations, especially federal organizations, to 
improve their information security.

The GAO Study

For many years, the GAO had found weaknesses in the information systems of 
federal agencies.  Many agencies had not instituted information security 
programs to establish controls for their systems and to monitor those controls 
for their effectiveness.  To gain a broader understanding of how security 
programs can be successfully implemented, GAO studied the management practices 
of eight nonfederal organizations.  The focus was on the management framework 
that the organizations had established rather than on specific controls that had 
been adopted.    

The nonfederal organizations studied by the GAO manage the same types of risks 
as federal organizations. Both federal and nonfederal organizations are 
concerned with protecting the confidentiality, integrity and availability of 
information.  Secure information systems are essential to providing high-quality 
services to customers, avoiding fraud and disclosure of sensitive information, 
promoting efficient business operations, and complying with laws and 
regulations.  All of the organizations studied had reoriented their security 
programs to make them visible, integral components of their business operations.

The GAO  findings have been published in an exposure draft executive guide 
entitled Information Security Management, Learning from Leading Organizations.  
The GAO discussed its findings with several government organizations concerned 
with federal security policies, including NIST.  After reviewing the comments 
received on the exposure draft, GAO plans to issue a final version of the 
executive guide.  
 
Risk Management

Risk management is the process of assessing risk, taking steps to reduce risk to 
an acceptable level, and maintaining that level of risk.  Managers analyze risks 
for many aspects of their business; they consider alternatives and implement 
plans to maximize returns on their investments.  A risk management process for 
information systems enables managers and their organizations to build an in-
depth knowledge about their systems and how they are interrelated.  

Risk management is a vital element of a comprehensive information security 
program.  Several NIST publications deal with this topic, including the 
following:

NIST Special Publication 800-12, An Introduction to Computer Security: The NIST 
Handbook 
NIST Special Publication 800-14, Generally Accepted Principles and Practices for 
Securing Information Technology Systems  (both documents are available at 
http://csrc.nist.gov, click on "Publications")     

Five Principles of Risk Management

The GAO identified five principles of risk management, which had been adopted by 
the organizations studied:  

* Assess risk and determine needs
* Establish a central management focus
* Implement appropriate policies and related controls
* Promote awareness
* Monitor and evaluate policy and control effectiveness

The successful organizations applied these principles by linking them into a 
cycle of activity that enabled the organizations to address risks on an ongoing 
basis.  The success of security programs depended upon the recognition and 
understanding of the senior executives that their information systems were 
subject to risks and that these risks affected their business operations.  After 
assessing risks of their business operations, the organizations established 
policies and selected controls.  They emphasized increased awareness of users to 
the policies and controls.  They monitored the effectiveness of the policies and 
controls and used the results to determine if modifications of policies and 
controls were needed.  Central security management offices coordinated this 
cycle of activities.  

All organizations studied said that risk considerations and related cost-benefit 
tradeoffs were a primary focus of their security programs.  Security was not an 
end in itself, but a set of policies and controls designed to support business 
operations.  

Sixteen Successful Practices

The GAO found that there were general practices associated with each risk 
management principle and that these practices were common to the organizations 
studied.  

* Principle:  Assess risk and determine needs.

* Practice 1.  Recognize information resources as essential organizational 
assets that must be protected.  The efforts of high-level executives to 
understand and manage risks helped to ensure that security was taken seriously 
at lower levels in the organization and that security programs had adequate 
resources.  Security specialists kept managers at all levels informed of 
emerging security issues.  For some organizations, the high-level interest was 
driven by an incident that demonstrated system vulnerabilities.  Some 
organizations were exploring new ways to improve operational efficiency and 
services to customers through information technology and were concerned about 
the security of these new systems.  

* Practice 2.  Develop practical risk assessment procedures that link security 
to business needs.  While the organizations explored a variety of risk 
management methodologies, they were generally satisfied with relatively simple 
risk assessment practices that could be adopted by different organizational 
units and that involved both technical people and those with knowledge of 
business operations.  In one organization, simple automated checklists were 
used.  Another organization established standard procedures for requesting and 
granting new network connections, requiring documentation of the business need 
for the connection and the risks associated with it.  None of the organizations 
tried to quantify the risks precisely because of the difficulty of identifying 
such data.

* Practice 3.  Hold program and business managers accountable.  The 
organizations studied felt that business managers should be held accountable for 
managing the information security risks associated with their operations, just 
as they are held accountable for other business risks.  Security specialists in 
these organizations had an advisory role, including keeping management informed 
about risks.  Similarly, program managers in federal agencies are also 
considered to be in the best position to determine which of their information 
resources are the most sensitive and to assess the impact of security problems.

* Practice 4.  Manage risk on a continuing basis.  The organizations studied 
emphasized continuous attention to security.  The continuity of attention helped 
to ensure that controls were appropriate and effective, and that individuals who 
used and maintained information systems complied with the organizational 
policies.  For federal organizations, the Office of Management and Budget has 
developed policies that promote a risk-based approach.  These policies have been 
issued in Circular A130, Appendix III, Security of Federal Automated Information 
Resources.  

* Principle:  Establish a central management focal point.

* Practice 5.  Designate a central group to carry out key activities.  Central 
security groups served as catalysts for ensuring that information security risks 
are considered in planned and ongoing operations.  These groups provided advice 
and expertise to all organizational levels and kept managers informed about 
security issues.  They developed organization-wide policies and guidance; 
educated users about information security risks; researched potential threats, 
vulnerabilities and control techniques; tested controls; assessed risks; and 
identified needed policies.

* Practice 6.  Provide the central group with ready and independent access to 
senior executives.  The organizations studied knew that security concerns could 
be at odds with the desires of business managers and system developers to 
develop new computer applications quickly and to avoid controls which might 
impede efficiency and convenience. Elevating security concerns to higher 
management levels helped to ensure that the risks were understood and taken into 
account when decisions were made.  

* Practice 7.  Designate dedicated funding and staff.  Unlike many federal 
agencies, the organizations studied defined budgets which enabled them to plan 
and set goals for information security programs.  The budgets covered central 
staff salaries, training, and security software and hardware.  In these 
organizations, information security responsibilities had been clearly defined 
for the groups carrying out the security programs, and dedicated staff resources 
had been provided to carry out these responsibilities.
 
* Practice 8.  Enhance staff professionalism and technical skills. The 
organizations studied had taken steps to provide personnel involved in 
information security programs with the skills and knowledge that they needed.  
Staff expertise was updated frequently to keep skills and knowledge current.  
Staff members attended technical conferences and specialized courses, connected 
with other professionals in the field, and reviewed technical literature and 
bulletins.  Special training courses were provided for system administrators who 
are the first line of defense against security intrusions and often in the best 
position to notice unusual activities. Because of the strong demand for security 
professionals, these organizations made special efforts to attract and keep 
expert staff members.
 
* Principle:  Implement appropriate policies and related controls.
    
* Practice 9.  Link policies to business risks.  The organizations studied 
stressed the importance of up-to-date policies that made sense to users and 
others who were expected to understand them.  A current and comprehensive set of 
policies is a key element in an effective security program.  These policies must 
be adjusted on a continuing basis to respond to newly identified risks.  The 
policies of the organizations studied paid particular attention to user 
behavior.  In today's interconnected network environment, users can accidentally 
disclose sensitive information to many people through electronic mail or 
introduce damaging viruses that are then transmitted to other computers in the 
organization's networks.

* Practice 10.  Distinguish between policies and guidelines.  Policies generally 
outlined fundamental requirements that managers considered to be mandatory, 
while guidelines contained more detailed rules for implementing the policies.   
By distinguishing between the two, the organizations studied were able to 
emphasize the most important elements of information security while providing 
flexibility to unit managers in implementing policies.  

* Practice 11.  Support policies through the central security group.  The 
organizations studied had central security management groups responsible for 
writing policies in partnership with other organizational officials.  The 
central groups provided explanations, guidance, and support to the various units 
in the organization.  This practice encouraged business managers to support 
centrally developed policies that addressed organizational needs and were 
practical to implement. 

* Principle:  Promote awareness.

* Practice 12.  Continually educate users and others on risks and related 
policies.  The central security management groups worked to improve everyone's 
understanding of the risks associated with information systems and of the 
policies and controls in place.  They encouraged compliance with policies and 
awareness on the part of users of the risks involved in disclosing sensitive 
information or passwords.

* Practice 13.  Use attention-getting and user-friendly techniques.  The 
techniques used included intranet Web sites that explained policies, standards, 
procedures, alerts and special notices; awareness videos with messages from top 
managers about the security program; interactive presentations by security staff 
with various user groups; security awareness days; and products with security 
related slogans. 

* Principle:  Monitor and evaluate policy and control effectiveness.

* Practice 14.  Monitor factors that affect risk and indicate security 
effectiveness.  The organizations studied directly tested the effectiveness of 
their controls.  Most  organizations relied primarily on auditors to carry out 
this function.  This enabled the security organizations to maintain their role 
as advisors.  The central security management groups kept track of audit 
findings and the organization's progress in implementing corrective actions.  In 
some cases, the central security management groups conducted their own tests, 
and some organizations allowed designated individuals to try to penetrate 
systems.  The testing of controls enabled the organizations to identify unknown 
vulnerabilities and to eliminate or reduce them.  All of the organizations 
monitored compliance with policies, mostly through informal feedback to the 
central security group from system administrators.  All of the organizations 
kept summary records of actual security incidents to measure the types of 
violations and the damage suffered from the incidents.  The records were 
valuable input for risk assessments and budget decisions.  Many of the 
organizations expressed an interest in developing better techniques to measure 
the benefits and costs of security policies and controls.   

* Practice 15.  Use results to direct future efforts and hold managers 
accountable.  Organization officials said that monitoring encourages compliance 
with information security policies, but the full benefits of monitoring are not 
achieved unless results are used to improve the security program.  Results can 
be used to hold managers accountable for their information security 
responsibilities.

* Practice 16.  Be alert to new monitoring tools and techniques.  Security 
managers of the organizations studied said that they continually looked for new 
tools to test the security of their systems.  They found current professional 
literature and involvement with professional organizations useful in learning 
about the latest monitoring tools and research efforts.

GAO's Guidance for Federal Organizations

Federal agencies are encouraged to develop an information security program that 
follows the general principles and practices outlined in the draft executive 
guide. By instituting this management framework, agencies can strengthen the 
security of their information systems, facilitate the development and 
improvement of systems, and take advantage of technology advances.  





